One of the components of the system class is the processor.
The system has a processor,
that processor is the CPU.
The processor is a pretty simple class.
All it does is return its utilization.
In fact, as of right now,
it doesn't have any private member variables,
although you could certainly create some and some might be
useful as you're determining the processor's utilization.
How do we figure out what the processor's utilization is?
The answer is actually you go to the Linux Filesystem.
In this case, if we go to /proc/stat,
we see that there is data on the different CPUs on the system.
This system actually has four CPUs,
so they're CPU0, 1,2, and 3,
and then there is an aggregate CPU line up top.
If you run htop,
actually you'll see information about each of the four CPUs.
But for the purposes of our system monitor,
which is going to be a little simpler,
we'll just output the aggregate CPU information.
Each of these numbers following the CPU tag represents units of time.
On Linux, they're are sometimes called Jiffies,
which are like clock ticks.
We'll include a little more textual information around
how to work with each of these numbers.
But essentially, what we want to do is add up
the amount of time or the number of Jiffies that
the system is actually working and then divide that by
the total number of Jiffies or the total amount of time that's passed.
So of all the time that's passed,
how much time has the CPU actually been active?
If we can read in this information and store it as integers,
and then do the division or I guess floating point values,
so we get a percentage result from the division.
Then we'll have our number.
One of the things that you might realize as you do this is
that these numbers represent information about the CPU from the beginning of time.
So particularly if the system has been up for a long time,
the CPU utilization might not change
very much over the period of time that you're running your system monitor.
So for example, if the system has been pretty dormant for a long time,
the CPU utilization will come across as low even if the CPU,
this instant actually happens to be running at full utilization or red lining,
because what we're doing is dividing the all-time number
of active time units by the all-time number of total time units,
which gives us a all time utilization,
but not a good measure of the current utilization right now.
So if you wanted to take this project a little bit
further and do something a little more sophisticated,
you could actually capture a more recent measurement of how active the CPU is.
You might look at how active the CPU was a second ago,
and how active the CPU is now,
and then try and figure out how heavily
utilized has the CPU been in the last second or the last 100 milliseconds.
That would give you a more active measurement
of how heavily utilized the CPU is right now,
as opposed to how heavily utilized the CPU has been over
its entire lifetime or the up-time of the system.
In fact, that's what htop does as well,
is it gives you a more current measurement of how active the system is.